And in those two countries, the students didn't go out where the problem was.
They were frightened by the magnitude and complexities of the problem, and they were trained very narrowly, excellent scientists.
Nobody knew how to put the pieces together.
The result was that they stayed in their laboratories and continued to do all too often what they had done for their doctorate thesis, had no relevance or virtually none.
to the needs of the agriculture and food production.
And so we were aware of this.
And this was why I insisted, if we were going to do anything, to be helpful.
After we had finished the job in Mexico, bring those students fresh out of school, not the ones that are up at the top of the pack.
You can't change them.
A few of them you can, but by and large you can.
The young ones were still
young and receptive to train beside us to make the connection between the brain work, the theoretical knowledge they got during their college days in their home country, which is almost entirely theoretical since most of them have had no practical training on the land.
Let them work beside us and our approach was also never locked off into little compartments.
It wasn't highly specialized plant breeders who didn't concern themselves about soil fertility and agronomic practice and control of insects and diseases and quality.
I was concerned about all of those, and probably I had to be because of the way our staff unfolded.
Dr. Bill Caldwell was
there before I got there on soils and agronomy, but he left a few months after I was there.
I had the good fortune of working with him and putting through, putting in and harvesting a few of the first corn fertilizer tests and the first wheat fertilizer test, planting them.
I harvested them.
He left.
and then we got a new soil scientist and he stayed a very short period of time and so there was in the first seven years there were about four or five changeovers of the agronomist soil scientists and i knew that we had to have this as part of the total production factor and so when they when we didn't have someone why i said all right we'll do it those of us under the breeding and plant pathology program and so we went ahead the best we could and
By the time we finally got a soil scientist that stayed, he was flabbergasted how much we knew that the soil scientist hadn't provided us with.
And he said at one of the first field days when he saw how much we knew and what an impact we'd had with farmers in the handling of soil fertility, fertilizers, and rotation, he says, I'll make you a promise.
It's a disaster the way it's been.
But from now on in,
I promise you that I'll open and cut through the brush ahead of you so that you won't have to do this again.
But I learned to do it and it served me very well in all of the other countries where I have to go on through the same brush.
It was the best thing that could happen to me as an individual.
Because it broadened you.
The whole thing.
So you had, in other words, what you're saying, you had to carry the whole project
from the beginning until completion?
Including, I had no training whatsoever in wheat quality, milling making, but I had to learn.
And since I had to deal with economic policy makers, I had to learn to talk their vernacular also.
So I'd have to read economics books and I'd have to read the serial chemistry books and when I'd visit Minneapolis I'd go over to General Mills or
to the wheat quality laboratories.
This was fortunate for me.
I took the extra time to do this.
In the corn program, they had four turnovers, not just in the soil fertility, but in the breeders in about the first six or seven years.
The result was that no one ever put the pieces together in the same morning.
Not because of me, but I had the continuity.
You follow what I mean?
Yes.
And I insisted that all of the people, no matter, they might be more interested in one aspect on, let's say, the breeding, or the plant mythology, or serial technology, or cultural practice.
But, by gosh, they needed to know something about everything, and I insisted on this with those who stayed at that Siyano in the summertime.
Some of them stayed there.
I said, look,
And also, I used to tell the other people who were coming in from, some of them were specialists in soils.
I would say to them in the early years, look, when a farmer comes in here to ask about wheat, you're supposed to know all about wheat more than anybody else.
But you better darn well learn to know more than anybody else about cotton, because we don't have a cotton specialist at the present time.
Because when that farmer finishes asking you the question, what variety shall I plant of wheat?
What date shall I plant it?
What fertilizer shall I put on?
How many irrigations shall I give it?
What about controlling the weeds?
And if there's aphids, how do I control them?
You'll know that because of the kind of training you've had.
But when he turns to you and he says, now what cotton varieties should I plant?
And when should I plant them?
And how many irrigations do I need to give?
What are my insect problems likely to be, and what do I do about them?
I said, you better know more about it than he does, than most of them will.
And the only way to do that, since we haven't had time to train you broadly, and I don't even know this, but you're going to be here the whole year round,
You better watch what's going on on the fields of the best cotton farmer.
You travel the whole valley in your spare time.
You see how he does it.
You ask questions, and then you get in the library.
You find the book and read all the theoretical background you can on it, and you're broadening yourself, and you do it for the other major crops.
You can't do it for everything but the ones that are important.
And that philosophy prevailed for a long time.
You lose it, but you don't lose it.
But the new generation doesn't know that this went on.
And then if you don't have somebody up here and the more experienced that puts these threads all together, you lose the package effect.
I did a lot of oral history interviews in Indiana with county agents.
And what you're describing to me sounds remarkably similar to what a county agent across the United States would be doing.
Could you make some similarities and differences for me?
The main difference is that we did the research too.
We were doing the whole basic breeding work, the plant pathology work on the diseases, the soil
When fertilizer didn't work, what was wrong, why, what was involved.
Same way on milling and baking, you'd have to try to keep all of those threads in your hands and find out, and then the economics, hold the pulse of the politicians.
Because I found out somewhat later that when the politicians back to the wall, is to the wall with a hunger or famine close at hand,
And then if you have previously checked for several years your technology on many farms, and you are pretty well convinced that it's as foolproof as you can make it.
There's no zero biological risk in this world.
That's pretty obvious to anyone who stops to think about it.
And to illustrate, I always use this with students.
I say, you know, the second when I was born, conceived, not born,
I could have been any one of 800,000 or a million brothers or sisters, and I was pretty lucky.
I was born with 10 fingers and 10 toes, a couple of pretty good legs and good general health.
My mental tape was probably just mediocre, but I figured that with that start, I had to do the best I could to develop it, and that's the way it is.
And remember, there's no biological risk, but when you have checked it, the best
technology you can put together on a lot of farms, which would be like the extension people.
And we sometimes worked with the extension after we had it going, but we had to do both.
In the beginning there wasn't any extension.
We were research and we were extension.
And then when the pressures are on the political leader, and very often the senior scientist won't move.
He's a bureaucrat.
He's afraid to move.
Status quo is comfortable for him.
He struggled for 20 years to get to the top of the peak, and he's afraid of change.
Somebody might rock the boat, and maybe there's an error in this technology, and maybe it'll destroy him.
Something go wrong, he'll be blamed, and so took the heat.
In the quiet of their own office, one of the biggest blockers in one country that I had to deal with, I tried to convince him.
And I even took them to Mexico to show them the operation, put them in the hands of the farmers at that time, told them to educate them, what it was like around here before and what had happened in changes in yield, not only in wheat but other crops, and how farmers had participated, even in support of research, financial support.
And he went back and he was insane.
So I told the minister of agriculture in that case, I said, this guy, he's just
paying lip service to you, and I know that he's blocking everything he can underneath.
He said, go and talk to him, personally.
You've known him for a long time.
There's no animosity between he and you, or you and he.
What country was this?
Pakistan.
And so I went to see him, and I said, Doctor so-and-so, the train is leaving.
It's pulling out onto the main track, this new technological package.
It's going to go.
No longer any doubt.
You should have been in the locomotive waving the flag and saying, look what we have done, what I have done.
I said, the way you're acting, you're going to miss the caboose.
I said, why have you done this?
Why are you doing it?
Then he told me frankly.
I've worked for 25 years to reach one of the few paying jobs, decent paying jobs in the government.
Supposing there's something wrong with that technology, there's a new race of rust that comes in and destroys the harvest.
It's my job, it's my family's future, and you probably won't even be here when it's happened.
I said, look, we've checked it for rust as best we know how, not only here but in many other countries.
We think it's as good as can happen.
Status quo is no good for you.
With the population growth you've got, status quo is going backwards.
Per capita wise, you're losing ground every hour.
He said, yes, but I won't be blamed for that.
That's somebody else's responsibility.
This is the psychology of the bureaucrat, scientific or typical public servant who gets to the top of the heap.
Status quo is comfortable, fear of the unknown.
is overwhelming.
Unfortunately it's at times even in universities.
Sure it is.
Which are supposed to deal with change.
One of the major functions of a university.
But anyway, let's move on before we get too depressed.
I wanted to know the difference between the United States type of an extension service, research station, county agent, and you've already explained that with what you folks were doing.
Except that ours wasn't detailed down to the ... We didn't have all of the nice organizational structures, nor the budgets, nor the number of trained people.
A lot of it had to spread from farmer to farmer.
Yeah, and we're still in the 1950s now.
We're not into the 90s.
Now I want to know... Well, part of this is spattered around in the 60s.
Yeah, right.
Now I want to know, we're still, though this is before 1960s, I want to know about the relationships.
We've already talked about some of the relationships with the farmers during the late 40s and throughout the 50s.
But I want to know, and we've touched on this a little bit too,
What did these local politicians think when you, an American, and of course a number of Mexican, young Mexican scientists, when you were out here and you were holding your field days and you were demonstrating that these changes were possible, how did they relate to him?
You didn't have any formal agreements with him, so how did they relate to him?
I'm sure it was a mixed bag.
First of all, the history of the two countries was not conducive to good understanding, and I don't need to go into the details on this.
It's kind of a pretty sad blotch on our history.
But it was surprising among the educated, even then, even though you were a gringo, if they thought that you were conscientious and working and trying to do something, I think that they forgave you for
most of this, and they soon overlooked it completely.
They may have, in the beginning, had this resentment.
Most of them, of course, don't know enough history to understand this.
The uneducated people, I think, they were oblivious to this.
But the better educated, obviously, they were.
So I think you had the whole mixed pattern there.
In the politicians, of course, they were sensitive to this.
Not a guy like Kais, because he was a big man.
And he used to, once we gained his confidence, he'd drag me with him wherever he went, if it had to do with wheat or agricultural policy.
But very often, if the president was out for some such thing, and I must say that the personalities sometimes were different, different secretaries of agriculture, but they would like to keep you in the background.
and let some of the Mexicans explain it, which is natural.
We were aware of this, and as soon as they were capable of doing a decent job, why, we've gotten the background at the field days or at the political meetings.
You know, Experiment Station, when you've got things going and making progress, is a pretty good fertile fruit field and vineyard for the politicians to reap in the benefits.
But then they don't want you too far out there where they can see that it's a foreigner.
I think you understand that.
Yes.
Okay.
So, in other words, it depended quite a bit on the individual politician.
Yeah.
And I think it depends on the kind of individuals we had.
I think we had some pretty aggressive people, and I think I had to be aggressive at certain times, and so did Herrar and Wellhausen.
And some of the others, like Dr. L. M. Roberts, little Jaco here, who was director.
First he was one of the corn breeders in Mexico and became the director in Colombia and spent his career with Rockefeller programs.
Well, he was pretty aggressive too.
But we knew when to talk and when not to talk.
That's the difference, when to keep a low profile and when to move aggressively.
In order to, there's no way of writing that formula.
You've got to sense it.
When the technology is good enough, when the confidence, not your confidence of them, theirs of you, is good enough to make a move.
And when the pressures are great enough, with a fair possibility of making breakthrough.
If you don't play that card at the right time and then the pressure is off, there's a couple of good crops, you may never be able to play it for another five or six years.
So it's a matter of timing.
Timing.
Kind of the same words you're saying.
Right.
OK.
Now let's talk a little bit about your reaction.
I can put it into real Texanese if you'd like.
Go ahead.
You have to sense when that package has been adequately tested and then move aggressively.
it's like knowing when the iron is hot yeah you need to dehorn with brand dehorn castrate and vaccinate all at the same time but you've got to make sure the calf is big enough to stand all of that abuse at one time or you'll kill them and kill yourself in this case okay now how about the relationship between and we're still in the 40s and 50s now the relationship between
Your station up in the Obregon area and private companies, private Mexican companies and private American companies.
You did discuss or talked a little bit about General Mills.
Yeah, at that time there was no private agricultural sector when we began in Mexico.
The first ones that started to show up were the machinery companies.
of ford for forged and tractors and international harvester and john deere and so on agricultural chemicals as far as insecticides herbicides and so on that came considerably later at least 10 years so what we're talking about is almost exclusively american corporations or companies but the fertilizer thing was mostly imports originally by
way of government except this one sad experience that I told you about.
That was an American outfit and it damn near derailed us for ten years.
And that person apparently knew that he was selling the wrong kind of fertilizer from the way he disappeared when I went to
had an appointment to see him.
So we had a mixed bag there too.
Once there was a local distributor of fertilizer in the town of Toluca, and there was one farm that was American owned and managed by an American whom I used to collaborate with because he was a good farmer.
And when they first started using fertilizer there in that valley, the high valley where we had our summer nurseries in Toluca,
we had to have both nitrogen and phosphorus there to get the right response.
And this person always got good results.
He was a good farmer.
That didn't surprise me.
But many of his neighbors, he used to try to help the neighbors, tell them, put on this fertilizer, that fertilizer with their corn, especially if it was a corn region.
And hell, there were no response, or very little.
Finally, they caught this guy that was the retailer,
Just mixing volcanic ash in for phosphors, no phosphors in it.
Just nitrogen.
So you go through all of these battle scars.
But the private sector is relatively new in Mexico and the sort of, I guess it's an outwash from
their social revolution, political revolution of 10 to 20.
It's fairly state socialistic in approach, and although there's private sector involved,
When it comes to basic food, they prefer to have a lot of this in government hands.
The result is that the seed organization nearly wrecked us.
In the first seeds that went to Pakistan and India, the 300 tons, 350 tons respectively, in 1965.
When it arrived, it had a germination of, we didn't know it then because the war was on between the two countries and we had to plant without checking the ships arrived a month late.
We had to plant without checking germination and seven days later we could see there's one plant here and one over here is a miserable emergence.
So we had to send out telegrams to
After contacting the minister in Pakistan where I was at the time of planting and Anderson was in India, I had with me in Pakistan Dr. Narvaez, my first Mexican trainee, then a full mature scientist, a good one, had the secretary minister send out telegrams to double all the seeding rates, something's wrong with the seed.
and wire back to Wellhausen, by then our director in Mexico, and says something's wrong with that damn seed and find out where.
And so he talked to the Mexican minister and they send an impartial scientist up to take samples out of that border, out of that warehouse where the seed came from up in Mexicali.
It had anywhere from eight, I guess I gave it generous, ten to twenty-eight percent germination.
That was the...
And that government seed organization was trying to say that the seed was damaged by the shipping company.
It was over-fumigated in Mexico.
That's what happened with the monopoly.
And when that happened, Caiz again got aggressive.
When he heard about this, and by doubling the seeding rate and fertilizing some more, it came through.
But it hung on that thin thread in both countries.
And when Kais heard about this, he was very interested in what the impact of this was in other countries.
When he heard, long before harvest, in the fall of the year, what a terrible time we had had, he just stomped down to the minister's office and said, look, this has been happening to the seed we've been getting from the government seed organization.
He said, we want now, and this was after he had established this patronato, using their money to support research.
We have been working now for whatever it was by then, it was 66, 56, more than 10 years, putting money into this.
We demand half of the basic seed when it leaves the experiment station.
We'll multiply our part.
The other half can go to your government seed organization.
And that became the way it was done.
And that broke their monopoly.
Then they have to measure up.
And that doesn't mean either one of them are 100%, but it's a lot better than it ever was.
But he never lived to see the full impact.
When I came back in March, when I came back from Pakistan and India in March, and it was beautiful in the spring of 66,
It was beautiful how it recovered.
And everybody was impressed.
But to me, it was at least 30% off of the yields that we should have had in most places.
And when I got to Tucson, on the way back to Ciudad Obregun, I met Jorge Parada on the street, one of these farmers, the same close friends.
He said, say, did you know that Rodolfo is in the hospital in Houston?
He had a bypass operation.
Debaki did it about a week.
or go.
He's getting along fine.
No, I didn't know.
I was over in India.
So, I sat down and fortunately wrote him a pretty good account of what was happening.
It was going to go and was going to fly.
I found out later.
He got that the day before he died, and he had read it, and he was tremendously enthusiastic.
His oldest son came over to tell me about it.
It's curious how these things work out.
Why do you have complications with the bypass?
Complication with the bypass.
I don't know actually the details of what happened.
It was a tremendous character.
Those were relatively new back then.
Yes.
That is a shame.
That brings me to another question that I'm interested in, and that dealt with distribution of the seed.
And I would have imagined that a private industry, a private American company, would have been quite interested in getting some sort of contract and producing
and then distributing and making a nice profit off of that.
Weren't any American companies interested in selling this sea?
Well, I think at that time they didn't even know that we existed, and probably secondly, they wouldn't have been well received at that time in Mexico anyway.
No, they probably wouldn't have.
And it's questionable whether we would have thought it good judgment to even become affiliated with them because of this philosophy.
You understand what I mean?
Yes.
So, I think that there were several factors there that probably weren't yet ripe for that kind of... Did a major seed corporation ever come in and attempt to... Well, they came in in corn or sorghum first.
because the government seed organization wasn't interested in soil.
So, the hybrids from Southwest, including Texas, came in and were highly successful, distributed, produced locally from the lines, distributed, became highly successful.
The government wouldn't permit them to work in hybrid corn for many years.
It's only been about
seven or eight, maybe ten, eight years or so ago, when then they begrudgingly permitted them to start work on hybrid corn.
And it's just now getting to the stage where it's, where they're starting to have some impact.
The companies are having some impact?
Just starting.
Private companies.
They did.
They have had in sorghum.
In the case of corn,
or sorghum, they haven't had any highly successful ones.
They've had one that's been pretty good in vegetable seeds.
Good, as a matter of fact.
And these farmers co-ops in multiplying wheat seed.
We're trying to get them to multiply the open pollinated, high nutritive value new corn varieties.
and they're just starting to do this in part.
It took us after the basic discovery in 1964 at Purdue, where they found that this particular type of OPEC-2 corn had twice as much lysine and tryptophan, which are the two essential amino acids that are limiting nutritive value in corn.
Everybody thought that when this was discovered and proven that there were biologically active difference levels, that it would be very easy to incorporate this into hybrids, and you'd have this as a bonus on top of the high yield.
It turned out it was very complicated, and so the hybrid corn companies, including the universities, after spending a lot of money for about seven or eight years, gave it up.
But our people kept working.
And the thing that made it a success was that we had very good biological laboratory analysis combined with good genetics and plant breeding and close collaboration, testing of thousands of samples as you were converting.
It turned out that the soft type genetically, because the starch was fluffy in the kernels, wasn't packed in, yielded about
20%, 25% less than the dent corns and the flint corns into which they had to be crossed.
They were also more susceptible to insects, both in the field and in the warehouse, and to ear rods.
And because of that combination of defects, they never went across.
But our people kept working and handling thousands of samples.
As you converted the kernels back,
toward hardness.
You couldn't with just the light.
The way you could tell the original opaque from the normal, you put it on top of the glass with the light from underneath, and the opaque shut off the passage of lights.
In the dent and the flints, they were vitreous, and so it reflected through.
But then when you started to convert them back to hards, you couldn't tell whether the hard one had the high lysine or it had lost it.
You couldn't tell it from the normal.
and only by chemical analysis, tens of thousands over twelve years have we reconstructed those now that yield as much as the normal or slightly more than the ones they were derived from and have the benefits of the additional high nutritive value.
And now, of course,
As Bill Brown, the Director, Chairman of the Board of Pioneers, says, well, he said, we invited him down to look at the program about two years ago now, give us a personal opinion.
He says, you've done it.
We didn't have the right linkage between the biochemical laboratory and the field.
He said, you've done it, and when we get our other priorities out of the way, we'll do it too.
So, it's kind of curious how these things unfold.
And again, continuity was the important part here.
Nobody was, and Dr. Sprague, who just retired, he protected like a mother hen, Evangelina Viegas, our biochemist, and Dr. Sander Vasil, our Indian geneticist and breeder, because there were plenty of hawks trying to tear him apart and saying we were going down a dead end.
from the funding agencies.
You see, now, unlike in the old Rockefeller programs, in the international centers, we've got a lot of bureaucratic things creeping in.
Up in that consultative group in support of international agriculture, this secretariat in the World Bank, where all the money's come together, which has become a big substance, a big quantity.
Most of those people have never done any research.
and they're passing judgments and asking for reports on this, that, and the other.
They're forced to do it because now the funds are coming from 35 different Western world governments and some of them Eastern Chinese.
from World Bank and from UNDP, United Nations Special Fund, and so you've got to fill out lots of reports and it becomes very bureaucratic, and you've got lots of people passing judgment that aren't qualified to pass judgment.
That's protected them.
That's a problem in all of the disciplines.
Every time I put in for a National Endowment for the Humanities grant, it's someone who knows a lot less about what
Those people don't, you know, they don't know, but they have to pass judgment.
That brings me to another issue, and that is, we've been talking basically about wheat and what you were trying to do with wheat on your section in the late 40s and throughout the 1950s, but whatever happened to corn and beans?
Well, the bean thing was sort of an orphan, and it lagged behind miserably.
compared to what support it should have had.
I'm talking about under the Rockefeller program.
Why?
Mostly because of lack of continuity.
There were quite a few people in charge of the program, and it changed.
You never had the continuity, and consequently, somebody who was accumulating a hell of a lot of knowledge, not just on the breeding, but disease, insects, and all of the way to grow it, and the marketing.
In other words, there was a large turnover of personnel.
And in part.
And they started a BAME program in Colombia.
But when the international organizations finally were spun off here as a result of this, the network, now CIOT in Colombia, I think, is making very good progress.
What does that stand for, CIOT?
Center for International... Center for Investigation in Tropical Agriculture.
Centro Internacional de Agricultura Tropical.
It's one of the 13 centers, and they're working primarily on cassava, maniat, beans, and some on tropical forages.
Those are the primary crops they're working on.
And when was that instituted?
It was the third one to come on stream.
First, Erie, the International Rice Research Institute, which was modeled after hours.
Did I ever tell you how this came about?
No, no.
Then you need to know this.
Well, we have to, let's... You need to make a note because this is a key thing that shows... Yeah, because this demonstrates a transition from the Rockefeller years to
Okay, so in other words, beans, as far as Mexico is concerned, which is one-third of the original program under the Rockefeller, floundered and not much.
During the Rockefeller program.
Now the national program's got a pretty good bean program going, but I think the one in the International Center in Colombia is sort of opening the way.
Okay.
Now what happened to the corn?
The corn went through many changes in leadership and it sent it back.
Plus, it had the bad luck of falling directly under the control of the seed organization, the Corn Commission, who tried to dictate that the corns at that time had to be hybrids because they wanted the monopoly.
Wellhausen originally had started out to make improved synthetic varieties, which the farmer could
get seed and continue to grow for a number of years without having to reinvest because of the lack of organization to distribute it and the lack of buying power.
And that was not the way the people who gained control of that seed organization, we didn't have them in wheat.
Nobody thought wheat was going to become an important crop.
So they left us alone.
It was partly by government neglect then?
that we had free roll, and once they saw that we were out in the clear, they tried to get their arms around us and choke us, and Kais and the co-ops wouldn't let them.
Isn't it funny how the human parts of these pictures change the rhythm, the way they evolve?
Sure, pure luck.
Because if you would have been placed under some form of a government bureaucracy, they would have been dictating to you left and right too.
Just like in the corn poker.
Sure.
The result might have been that after a year or two, you would have just become disgusted and left.
But nobody paid any attention to us because they were sure that wheat wouldn't be grown successfully in Mexico.
As a matter of fact, in the early years I must have looked pretty unhappy sometimes because the sub-secretary of agriculture in that first administration that I worked under, he was a wonderful, warm individual, Gonzales Carriado, he was a trained agronomist but never done any research, but he understood agriculture pretty well, and he used to say, but Dr. Borlaug,
don't take it so hard.
He says, we know that Mexico can never produce the weed it needs, but do the best you can and see if you can help improve the situation a bit.
It's funny how it all works.
That is interesting.
There must be other differences though, and it must give you some gratification
to know that there were basically three researchers carrying out three different types of programs in Mexico in the early days, and you're the one who basically succeeded.
Why?
Well, I think we have to say that the corn program has made impact, and the impact now is ready to go on the corn program in many different niches of the world.
Sprague, before he retired, since the last...
Thirteen, fourteen years.
He originally worked in India.
He got a fairly decent program started, small, but it had some impact.
And then he was moved to Thailand, and he was successful in making Thailand an importer of corn, or exporter, the only exporter in Asia.
And then he came back to headquarters.
He was a rockfellow man originally also.
and he was there for 14 years.
He's still young and vigorous.
He's got about six or seven years when he should have stayed on, but he's kind of a complex personality, but that program is ready to move now and it's ready to make impact.
I hope the new director keeps it on track.
It's ready to flower.
And that's the one in Thailand?
Is that the program in Thailand?
No, in Mexico.
Oh, okay, so that's the one in Mexico.
He was transferred back to head the whole Mexican program in 1971.
Oh, okay.
And how long did he stay there then?
Until the end of last year, when he took early retirement.
Dr. Ernie Sprague.
And so it's ready to produce now, unless it's mismanaged.
But whether this new director can sell the goods, he's got the package.
And whenever you change horses in the middle of the stream, I'm skeptical.
Because they don't know how good that technology is.
Do you understand what I mean?
It's not the fault of the individual.
It goes right back to this question of continuity.
If that thing were out in big commercial now, it would have enough momentum
so that while the new director picks up the pieces and understands what he's managing, it would continue to move forward.
There's a good research core underneath, young people, vigorous,
But as you well know, if the director doesn't handle it right, that young team will fly apart in all parts of the world because they're known to be very productive corn scientists.
They don't have to stay there.
These are critical issues that always come into the picture.
So I see at least two reasons.
I don't want to put words in your mouth, but I see at least two reasons then for the fact that in those years of the
and the others didn't, and one was, let's just say, continuity.
Another one was the lack of government interference on wheat, but not so on the other two.
Well, the bean, there wasn't interference, it was just neglect.
We didn't have enough continuity and the right manpower to head the program.
And the other issue then is personalities of the three directors.
We never had the right person in charge of that beam program.
Wellhausen was in charge of both corn and beans, and he was capable of running both of them.
But when Herrera was moved to New York office in about 1950, Dr. Wellhausen became the program director.
Administratively took up virtually all, yes, all of his time.
But he still, because of love for the corn plant, he tried to maintain control.
Maybe I shouldn't say control, but a strong influence.
But he was losing contact all of the time.
And this discouraged the people that were there.
And so we lost some of the best talent there.
It's complicated.
And I'm not pointing a finger at any personality.
And I'm hesitant to mention names.
I think that several of those people who, starting with Wellhouse, and several of them who followed, didn't stay too long, but followed, had a lot more ability than I had, but they didn't have the continuity.
Maybe they didn't know how to... Maybe determination.
Maybe.
Maybe they didn't know how to master their assets.
Maybe they didn't also have a feel for how to handle the politicians and maybe the human side of the issue.
I think that may have been quite a bit of it.
I'm hesitant to mention this because I'm afraid somebody might say, oh hell, Borlaug's egotistical, and I don't mean it in that sense at all.
I'm trying to be analytical.
I don't have anything to sell except trying to get a message across about how it happened as I interpret
and trying to be as unbiased as I can from the point of view that I'm expressing.